this image of the Vitruvian Man taken
from Leonardo sketches has become one of
the most recognizable symbols of the
Renaissance but why it's a simple pen
and ink drawing right wrong let's start
to answer this question with a math
problem I know how to calculate the area
of a circle I take the value for pi and
multiply it by the radius squared I also
know how to take the area of a square I
multiply the base by itself but how can
I take the area of a circle and create a
square with an equal area this is a
problem often called squaring a circle
that was first proposed in the ancient
world and like many ideas of the ancient
world it was given new life during the
Renaissance as it turns out this problem
is impossible to solve because of the
nature of Pi but that's another story
Leonardo sketch which is influenced by
the writings of the Roman architect
Vitruvius places a man firmly at the
center of a circle and a square retrouve
has claimed the navel is the center of
the human body and that if one takes a
compass and places the fixed point on
the navel a circle can be drawn
perfectly around the body
additionally Vitruvius recognized that
arm span and height have a nearly
perfect correspondence in the human body
thus placing the body perfectly inside a
square as well
Leonardo use the ideas of Vitruvius to
solve the problem of squaring a circle
metaphorically using mankind as the area
for both shapes Leonardo wasn't just
thinking about Vitruvius though there
was an intellectual movement in Italy at
the time called Neoplatonism this
movement took an old concept from the
fourth century developed by Plato and
Aristotle called the great chain of
being this belief holds that the
universe has a hierarchy resembling a
chain and that chain starts at the top
with God then travels down through the
Angels planets stars and all life forms
before ending with demons and Devils
early in this philosophic movement it
was thought that mankind's place in this
chain was exactly in the center because
humans have a mortal body accompanied by
an immortal soul we divide the universe
nicely in half around the time Leonardo
sketched the Vitruvian Man however a
neoplatonist named Pico della Mirandola
had a different idea he pried mankind
off the chain and claimed that humans
have a unique ability to take any
position they want Pico claimed that God
desired of being capable of
comprehending the beautiful
uncomplicated universe he had created
this led to the creation of mankind
which he placed at the center of the
universe with the ability to take
whatever form he pleases mankind
according to Pico could crawl down the
chain and behave like an animal or crawl
up the chain and behaved like a God it's
our choice looking back at the sketch we
can see that by changing the position of
the man he can fill the irreconcilable
areas of a circle and the square if
geometry is a language universe is
written in then this sketch seems to say
we can exist within all its elements
mankind can fill whatever shape he
pleases geometrically and
philosophically as well
in this one sketch Leonardo was able to
combine the mathematics religion
philosophy architecture and artistic
skill of his age no wonder to become
such an icon for the entire time period
you